Reference DOCS for proxied PKI (#45259)
elastic/elasticsearch: x-pack/docs/en/security/authentication/configuring-pki-realm.asciidoc

[[configuring-pki-realm]]
=== Configuring a PKI realm

You can configure {es} to use Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) certificates to
authenticate users. This requires clients connecting directly to {es} to
present X.509 certificates. The certificates must first be accepted for

> authentication on the SSL/TLS layer on {es}, before they are optionally further

Reviewer: ```suggestion
authentication on the SSL/TLS layer on {es}. They can then optionally be further
```

Author: I've split the phrase as:
```
The certificates must first be accepted for
authentication on the SSL/TLS layer on {es}. Only then they are optionally
further validated by a PKI realm.
```

> validated by a PKI realm. Users might also connect to {kib}, where they present

Reviewer: ```suggestion
validated by a PKI realm. Users might also connect to {kib} and provide
```

Author: I went with `and present`, I believe present is more customary than provide in this case.

their certificate, but this requires a little
<<pki-realm-for-proxied-clients,extra configuration>>. On {es}, this
configuration enables {kib} to act as a proxy for SSL/TLS authentication and

> submit the client certificates to {es} to be further validated by a PKI realm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to submit the client certificates to {es} for further validation by a PKI realm.
```

> For more general information, see {stack-ov}/pki-realm.html[PKI User Authentication].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more general information, see {stack-ov}/pki-realm.html[PKI user authentication].
```

[float]
[role="xpack"]
[[pki-realm-for-direct-clients]]
==== PKI authentication for clients connecting directly to {es}

To use PKI in {es}, you configure a PKI realm, enable client authentication on
the desired network layers (transport or http), and map the Distinguished Name

> (DN) from the Subject field in the user certificate to roles, using the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(DN) from the Subject field in the user certificate to roles by using the
```

<<security-api-role-mapping,role-mapping API>> or the role-mapping file.

You can also use a combination of PKI and username/password authentication. For
example, you can enable SSL/TLS on the transport layer and define a PKI realm to
require transport clients to authenticate with X.509 certificates, while still
authenticating HTTP traffic using username and password credentials. You can
also set `xpack.security.transport.ssl.client_authentication` to `optional` to
allow clients without certificates to authenticate with other credentials.

> IMPORTANT: If you only allow PKI authentication for clients connecting directly

Reviewer: It is unclear to me from the placement of the "only" what is prohibited here.   Is one of these right?:

> If clients must be authenticated by PKI in order to connect directly to {es} ...

> If PKI authentication is required only by clients connecting directly to {es}...

Author: Neither 🤦‍♂ 
I've rephrased it as:
```
IMPORTANT: You must enable SSL/TLS and enable client authentication, if you
only allow PKI authentication for clients connecting directly to {es}, but not
through {kib}.
```

[[configuring-pki-realm]]
=== Configuring a PKI realm

You can configure {es} to use Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) certificates to
authenticate users. This requires clients connecting directly to {es} to
present X.509 certificates. The certificates must first be accepted for
authentication on the SSL/TLS layer on {es}. Only then they are optionally

> further validated by a PKI realm. Users might also connect to {kib} and

Author: Good point.

configuration enables {kib} to act as a proxy for SSL/TLS authentication and
to submit the client certificates to {es} for further validation by a PKI realm.

For more general information, see {stack-ov}/pki-realm.html[PKI user authentication].

[float]
[role="xpack"]
[[pki-realm-for-direct-clients]]
==== PKI authentication for clients connecting directly to {es}

To use PKI in {es}, you configure a PKI realm, enable client authentication on
the desired network layers (transport or http), and map the Distinguished Name
(DN) from the Subject field in the user certificate to roles by using the
<<security-api-role-mapping,role-mapping API>> or the role-mapping file.

You can also use a combination of PKI and username/password authentication. For
example, you can enable SSL/TLS on the transport layer and define a PKI realm to
require transport clients to authenticate with X.509 certificates, while still
authenticating HTTP traffic using username and password credentials. You can
also set `xpack.security.transport.ssl.client_authentication` to `optional` to
allow clients without certificates to authenticate with other credentials.

> IMPORTANT: You must enable SSL/TLS and enable client authentication, if you

Author: 😞 This was raised by Lisa as well, and I still didn't achieve to re-word it properly. I hope that now is better, but probably isn't 🙂

{es}, this configuration enables {kib} to act as a proxy for SSL/TLS
authentication and to submit the client certificates to {es} for further
validation by a PKI realm.

For more general information, see {stack-ov}/pki-realm.html[PKI user authentication].

[float]
[role="xpack"]
[[pki-realm-for-direct-clients]]
==== PKI authentication for clients connecting directly to {es}

To use PKI in {es}, you configure a PKI realm, enable client authentication on
the desired network layers (transport or http), and map the Distinguished Name
(DN) from the Subject field in the user certificate to roles by using the
<<security-api-role-mapping,role-mapping API>> or the role-mapping file.

You can also use a combination of PKI and username/password authentication. For
example, you can enable SSL/TLS on the transport layer and define a PKI realm to
require transport clients to authenticate with X.509 certificates, while still
authenticating HTTP traffic using username and password credentials. You can
also set `xpack.security.transport.ssl.client_authentication` to `optional` to
allow clients without certificates to authenticate with other credentials.

> IMPORTANT: You must enable SSL/TLS to use PKI. If a PKI realm does **not**

Author: This was a section for clients connecting directly to {es}, so I have placed only the first notice here:
```
IMPORTANT: You must enable SSL/TLS with client authentication to use PKI when
clients connect directly to {es}.
```
and placed the second one in the section about clients connecting to Kibana.
```
NOTE: PKI authentication delegation requires that the
`xpack.security.authc.token.enabled` setting be `true` and that SSL/TLS be
configured (without SSL/TLS client authentication).
```

          pki1:
            username_pattern: "EMAILADDRESS=(.*?)(?:,|$)"
------------------------------------------------------------

NOTE: If the regex is too restrictive and does not match the Subject DN of the

> client's certificate, then the realm will not authenticate the certificate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
client's certificate, the realm cannot authenticate the certificate.
```

Author: I picked `client's certificate, the realm does not authenticate the certificate.`

--

. Restart {es} because realm configuration is not reloaded automatically. If
you're following through with the next steps, you might wish to hold the
restart for last.

. <<configuring-tls,Enable SSL/TLS>>.

. Enable client authentication on the desired network layers (transport or http).
+
--

> When clients connect directly to {es}, and are not proxy-authenticated by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When clients connect directly to {es} and are not proxy-authenticated by
```

{kib}, the PKI realm relies on the TLS settings of the node's network
interface. The realm can be configured to be more restrictive than the

> underlying network connection - that is, it is possible to configure the node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
underlying network connection. That is to say, it is possible to configure the node
```

        pki:
          pki1:
            truststore:
              path: "ES_PATH_CONF/pki1_truststore.jks"
------------------------------------------------------------

If the truststore is password protected, the password should be configured by
adding the appropriate `secure_password` setting to the {es} keystore.  For
example, the following command adds the password for the example realm above:

[source, shell]
------------------------------------------------------------
bin/elasticsearch-keystore add \
xpack.security.authc.realms.pki.pki1.truststore.secure_password
------------------------------------------------------------

The `certificate_authorities` option can be used as an alternative to the
`truststore.path` setting, when the certificate files are PEM formatted

> (accepts a list). The two options are exclusive, they cannot be both used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. The setting accepts a list. The two options are exclusive, they cannot be both used
```

simultaneously.
--

. Map roles for PKI users.
+
--
You map roles for PKI users through the <<security-role-mapping-apis,role

> mapping APIs>> or by using a file stored on each node. Configurations of both

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mapping APIs>> or by using a file stored on each node. Both configuration
```

// CONSOLE
<1> The distinguished name (DN) of a PKI user.

Or, alternatively, configured inside a role-mapping file. The file's path

> defaults to `ES_PATH_CONF/role_mapping.yml` but a different path, also inside

Reviewer: ```suggestion
defaults to `ES_PATH_CONF/role_mapping.yml`. You can specify a different path--also inside
```

> ES_PATH_CONF, may be specified by the realm setting `files.role_mapping` (e.g.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ES_PATH_CONF--by using the `files.role_mapping` realm setting (e.g.
```

alternative to role mapping.

--

[float]
[role="xpack"]
[[pki-realm-for-proxied-clients]]
==== PKI authentication for clients connecting to {kib}

> Clients must normally connect directly to {es}, because the {es} PKI realm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clients must normally connect directly to {es} because the {es} PKI realm
```

relies on the node's network interface to do the SSL/TLS authentication and to
also internally forward the client's certificate chain for the realm to be able
to optionally validate it. If SSL/TLS authenticatication is to be performed

> by {kib}, then the PKI realm must be configured to permit delegating it.

Reviewer: The "it" is unclear here, so I suggest clarifying that or changing it to:
```suggestion
by {kib}, then the PKI realm must be configured to permit delegation.
```

Specifically, when clients presenting X.509 certificates connect to {kib},

> {kib} will perform the SSL/TLS authentication and will forward the client's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{kib} performs the SSL/TLS authentication. {kib} then forwards the client's
```

certificate chain, by calling an {es} API, to have them further validated by
the PKI realms that have been configured for delegation.

To permit authentication delegation for a specific {es} PKI realm, start by
configuring the realm for the usual case, as detailed in the

> <<pki-realm-for-direct-clients,PKI authentication for clients connecting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<<pki-realm-for-direct-clients>>
```

> directly to {es}>> section, but make sure that you have explicitly configured

Reviewer: ```suggestion
section, but make sure that you have explicitly configured
```

a `truststore` (or, equivalently `certificate_authorities`) even though it is
the same trust configuration that you have configured on the network layer.
Afterwards, simply toggle the `delegation.enabled` realm setting to `true`.
This realm is now allowed to validate delegated PKI authentication (after
restarting {es}).

NOTE: PKI authentication delegation requires that

> `xpack.security.authc.token.enabled` be `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `xpack.security.authc.token.enabled` setting is `true`.
```

NOTE: {kib} also needs to be configured to allow PKI certificate authentication.

A PKI realm with `delegation.enabled` still works unchanged for clients

> connecting directly to {es}. Directly authenticated users and users PKI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
connecting directly to {es}. Directly authenticated users and users that are PKI
```

> authenticated by delegation to {kib} indistinctly follow the same

Reviewer: I'm not sure what "indistinctly" means here.  Should it be "indirectly"?

Author: it means "both", I replaced it.

{stack-ov}/mapping-roles.html[role mapping rules] or
{stack-ov}/realm-chains.html#authorization_realms[authorization realms

> configurations]. If using the <<security-role-mapping-apis,role mapping APIs>>,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
configurations]. If you use the <<security-role-mapping-apis,role mapping APIs>>,
```

> it is possible to distinguish between users authenticated by delegation from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you can distinguish between users that are authenticated by delegation and
```

> users authenticated directly, because the former ones have the following two

Reviewer: ```suggestion
users that are authenticated directly. The former have the following two
```

extra fields `pki_delegated_by_user` and `pki_delegated_by_realm` in the user's
metadata. In the common setup, where authentication is delegated to {kib}, the
values of these fields are `kibana` and `reserved`, respectively. For example,
the following role mapping rule:

[source,js]
--------------------------------------------------
PUT /_security/role_mapping/direct_pki_only
{
  "roles" : [ "role_for_pki1_direct" ],
  "rules" : {
    "all": [
      {
        "field": {"realm.name": "pki1"}
      },
      {
        "except": {
          "field": {
            "metadata.pki_delegated_by_user": null <1>
          }
        }
      }
    ]
  },
  "enabled": true
}
--------------------------------------------------
// CONSOLE
<1> only when this metadata field is set (it is *not* `null`) the user has been
authenticated in the delegation scenario.

> will assign the `role_for_pki1_direct` role to all users that have been

Reviewer: I recommend moving this "...will assign...." phrase up to form a complete sentence.

to optionally validate it. If SSL/TLS authenticatication is to be performed
by {kib}, the PKI realm must be configured to permit delegation.

Specifically, when clients presenting X.509 certificates connect to {kib},
{kib} performs the SSL/TLS authentication. {kib} then forwards the client's
certificate chain, by calling an {es} API, to have them further validated by
the PKI realms that have been configured for delegation.

To permit authentication delegation for a specific {es} PKI realm, start by
configuring the realm for the usual case, as detailed in the
<<pki-realm-for-direct-clients>>
section. However, you must make sure that you have explicitly configured
a `truststore` (or, equivalently `certificate_authorities`) even though it is
the same trust configuration that you have configured on the network layer.
Afterwards, simply toggle the `delegation.enabled` realm setting to `true`.
This realm is now allowed to validate delegated PKI authentication (after
restarting {es}).

NOTE: PKI authentication delegation requires that
the `xpack.security.authc.token.enabled` setting is `true`.

NOTE: {kib} also needs to be configured to allow PKI certificate authentication.

> A PKI realm with `delegation.enabled` still works unchanged for clients

Author: Well... I'm not sure about it, since this very paragraph says that users (delegated or not) follow the same role mapping rules. However, I've made it a new paragraph for the mapping example that distinguishes delegated users. Maybe @lcawl can weigh in here too?

alternative to role mapping.

--

[float]
[role="xpack"]
[[pki-realm-for-proxied-clients]]
==== PKI authentication for clients connecting to {kib}

> Clients must normally connect directly to {es} because the {es} PKI realm

Author: Intuitively, the alternative suggestion sounds better, so I went with that. Thank you!

also internally forward the client's certificate chain for the realm to be able
to optionally validate it. If SSL/TLS authenticatication is to be performed
by {kib}, the PKI realm must be configured to permit delegation.

Specifically, when clients presenting X.509 certificates connect to {kib},
{kib} performs the SSL/TLS authentication. {kib} then forwards the client's
certificate chain, by calling an {es} API, to have them further validated by
the PKI realms that have been configured for delegation.

To permit authentication delegation for a specific {es} PKI realm, start by
configuring the realm for the usual case, as detailed in the
<<pki-realm-for-direct-clients>>
section. However, you must make sure that you have explicitly configured
a `truststore` (or, equivalently `certificate_authorities`) even though it is
the same trust configuration that you have configured on the network layer.
Afterwards, simply toggle the `delegation.enabled` realm setting to `true`.
This realm is now allowed to validate delegated PKI authentication (after
restarting {es}).

NOTE: PKI authentication delegation requires that
the `xpack.security.authc.token.enabled` setting is `true`.

> NOTE: {kib} also needs to be configured to allow PKI certificate authentication.

Reviewer 2: @albertzaharovits relevant Kibana docs are live now :) https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/7.4/kibana-authentication.html#pki-authentication

authenticated by delegation to {kib} both follow the same
{stack-ov}/mapping-roles.html[role mapping rules] or
{stack-ov}/realm-chains.html#authorization_realms[authorization realms
configurations].

However, if you use the <<security-role-mapping-apis,role mapping APIs>>,
you can distinguish between users that are authenticated by delegation and
users that are authenticated directly. The former have the
extra fields `pki_delegated_by_user` and `pki_delegated_by_realm` in the user's
metadata. In the common setup, where authentication is delegated to {kib}, the
values of these fields are `kibana` and `reserved`, respectively. For example,
the following role mapping rule will assign the `role_for_pki1_direct` role to
all users that have been authenticated directly by the `pki1` realm, by
connecting to {es} instead of going through {kib}:

[source,js]
--------------------------------------------------
PUT /_security/role_mapping/direct_pki_only
{
  "roles" : [ "role_for_pki1_direct" ],
  "rules" : {
    "all": [
      {
        "field": {"realm.name": "pki1"}
      },
      {
        "except": {
          "field": {
            "metadata.pki_delegated_by_user": null <1>
          }

>         }

Reviewer 3: Isn't this example backwards (or am I confused?)
This is saying:
_The user has the "role_for_pki1_direct" role if they are authenticated by the "pki1" realm, **unless** they have a null delegation_
That _unless_ should be an _and_ shouldn't it?

Author: Oops, you're right! This is what I've changed it to:
```
{
  "roles" : [ "role_for_pki1_direct" ],
  "rules" : {
    "all": [
      {
        "field": {"realm.name": "pki1"}
      },
      {
        "field": {
          "metadata.pki_delegated_by_user": null <1>
        }
      }
    ]
  },
  "enabled": true
}
```

To permit authentication delegation for a specific {es} PKI realm, start by
configuring the realm for the usual case, as detailed in the
<<pki-realm-for-direct-clients>>
section. Note that you must explicitly configure a `truststore`
(or, equivalently `certificate_authorities`) when configuring
a PKI realm for delegation, as delegated PKI will not automatically
make use of the network layer's trust settings. 

> a `truststore` (or, equivalently `certificate_authorities`) even though it is

Reviewer 3: This section ended up a bit garbled after my suggestion got applied (Oh I wish :octocat: would support multiline suggestions).

Author: Nice catch again, thanks!
